KEP: Add an exponential backoff mechanism to the requeueing strategy (#1608)
kubernetes-sigs/kueue: keps/1282-pods-ready-requeue-strategy/README.md

In this case, the administrator would like the evicted workload to be requeued as soon as possible on the newly available capacity.

#### Story 2

> In the story 1 scenario, when we set `waitForPodsReady.requeuingTimestamp=Eviction`, 

Reviewer: I am guessing this should be `waitForPodsReady.requeuingTimestamp=Creation` ... which would preserve the pre-eviction ordering (i.e. put the evicted workload at the front of the queue again).

Author: Oops, it's a great catch! Thank you!

Author: Done.

the workload endlessly or repeatedly can be put in front of the queue after eviction in the following eviction reasons:

1. The workload don't have the proper configurations like image pull credential and pvc name, etc.

> 2. The cluster can meet flavorQuotas, but each node doesn't have the resources that each podSet requests.  

Reviewer: 3. If there are multiple resource flavors that match the workload (flavors 1 & 2) and the workload is running on flavor 2 (where there happens to be a quota issue - i.e. flavor 2 is backed by on-demand capacity): there is a high likelihood that the workload will be requeued on the same flavor - with the same capacity issue (because other workloads will have taken up resource flavor 1 while the requeued workload was running.

Author: @nstogner Sorry, I couldn't understand when eviction happens, who is the preemptor, and who is the evictor.

Could you clarify?

Reviewer 2: @nstogner case is still about waitForPodsReady timeout. Once the workload is evicted because it didn't become ready, there is the possibility that it won't fit in the first flavor, so it will be assigned back to the second flavor.

Reviewer: Yes, my comment was in regards to the situation where eviction was due to waitForPodsReady. If the requeuing timestamp is configured to be the creation timestamp, and all resource flavors are in use, without backoff there is a very high likelihood that the freshly evicted workload will be readmitted into the same resource flavor, resulting in flapping.

Author: >  case is still about waitForPodsReady timeout. Once the workload is evicted because it didn't become ready, there is the possibility that it won't fit in the first flavor, so it will be assigned back to the second flavor.

Oh, it makes sense. I will add this story here.
@alculquicondor @nstogner Thank you.

Author: Done.

In this case, the administrator would like the evicted workload to be requeued as soon as possible on the newly available capacity.

#### Story 2

In the story 1 scenario, when we set `waitForPodsReady.requeuingStrategy.timestamp=Creation`, 
the workload endlessly or repeatedly can be put in front of the queue after eviction in the following eviction reasons:

1. The workload don't have the proper configurations like image pull credential and pvc name, etc.
2. The cluster can meet flavorQuotas, but each node doesn't have the resources that each podSet requests.  

> Specifically, the second reason will often occur in the workloads required gpus.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Specifically, the second reason will often occur if the available quota is fragmented across multiple nodes,
such that the workload can't be scheduled in a node even though there is enough
quota in the cluster.
For example,
```

Author: Done.

Given that the workload with a request of 2 gpus is submitted to the cluster that
has 2 worker nodes with 4 gpus, and 3 gpus are used (which means 1 gpu is free in each node),
the workload will be repeatedly evicted because of the lack of resources in each node even though the cluster has enough capacities.

In this case, to avoid rapid repetition of the admission and eviction cycle,
the administrator would like to use an exponential backoff mechanism and add a maximum number of retries.

#### Story 3

In the story 3 scenario, after the evicted workload reached the maximum retry condition, 

> we want to easily requeue the workload to the queue without recreating the job. 

Reviewer 2: And what is the high level solution for this?

Reviewer 2: Maybe put in the story something like:

"This is possible if the Workload is deactivated (active=false), as opposed to deleting it".

Author: SGTM

Author: Done.

In this case, the administrator would like the evicted workload to be requeued as soon as possible on the newly available capacity.

#### Story 2

In the story 1 scenario, when we set `waitForPodsReady.requeuingStrategy.timestamp=Creation`, 
the workload endlessly or repeatedly can be put in front of the queue after eviction in the following eviction reasons:

1. The workload don't have the proper configurations like image pull credential and pvc name, etc.
2. The cluster can meet flavorQuotas, but each node doesn't have the resources that each podSet requests.  

> 3. Multiple flavors are matched for the workload, but the workload can not be launched on the backed flavors (which means non-primary flavor).

Reviewer 2: was this always there? I don't really understand it.

Author: I added this story built with https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/kueue/pull/1608/files#r1460075048.

Reviewer 2: oh right. Let me rephrase:

```
If there are multiple resource flavors that match the workload (for example, flavors 1 & 2) and the workload was running on flavor 2, it's likely that the workload will be readmitted on the same flavor.
```

Author: Thank you for this suggestion!

Author: Done.

### API Changes

#### KueueConfig

Add an additional field to the KueueConfig to allow administrators to specify what timestamp to consider during queue sorting (under the pre-existing waitForPodsReady block).

Possible settings:

* `Eviction` (Back of queue)
* `Creation` (Front of queue)

```go
type WaitForPodsReady struct {
	...
	// requeuingStrategy defines the strategy for requeuing a Workload
	// +optional

> 	RequeuingStrategy *RequeuingStrategy `json:"requeuingStrategy,omitempty"`

Author: I think that we can break this API for now since we haven't yet released this API.

}

type RequeuingStrategy struct {
	// timestamp defines the timestamp used for requeuing a Workload
	// that was evicted due to Pod readiness. Defaults to Eviction.
	// +optional
	Timestamp *RequeuingTimestamp `json:"timestamp,omitempty"`
	
	// backOffLimitCount defines the maximum number of requeuing retries.

> 	// When the number is reached, the workload is deactivated.	

Reviewer 2: What do you mean by deactivated?

Author: I  meant using "Suspend a running Job without requeueing" feature.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
	// When the number is reached, the workload is deactivated (`.spec.active=false`).	
```

Author: Done.

	//
	// Defaults to null. 
	// +optional
	BackOffLimitCount *int32 `json:"backOffLimitCount,omitempty"`
    
	// backOffLimitTimeout defines the time for a workload that 
	// has once been admitted to reach the PodsReady=true condition. 
	// When the time is reached, the workload is deactivated.
	// 	
	// Defaults to null.
	// +optional

> 	BackOffLimitTimeout *int32 `json:"backOffLimitTimeout,omitempty"`

Reviewer 2: I don't understand what this is for. Can you rephrase?

Author: I will remove this knob as we discussed here: https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/kueue/pull/1608#discussion_r1475161093

Reviewer 2: Please remove so we can move forward with the KEP.

Author: Done.

}

type RequeuingTimestamp string

const (
	// creationTimestamp timestamp (from Workload .metadata.creationTimestamp).
	CreationTimestamp RequeuingTimestamp = "Creation"
    
	// evictionTimestamp timestamp (from Workload .status.conditions).
	EvictionTimestamp RequeuingTimestamp = "Eviction"
)
```

#### Workload

Add a new field, "requeuedCount", to the Workload to allow recording the number of times a workload is requeued.

```go
type WorkloadStatus struct {
	...

> 	// requeuedCount determines the number of times a workload has been requeued.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
	// requeuedCount records the number of times a workload has been requeued.
```

Author: Done.

### API Changes

#### KueueConfig

Add an additional field to the KueueConfig to allow administrators to specify what timestamp to consider during queue sorting (under the pre-existing waitForPodsReady block).

Possible settings:

* `Eviction` (Back of queue)
* `Creation` (Front of queue)

```go
type WaitForPodsReady struct {
	...
	// requeuingStrategy defines the strategy for requeuing a Workload
	// +optional
	RequeuingStrategy *RequeuingStrategy `json:"requeuingStrategy,omitempty"`
}

type RequeuingStrategy struct {
	// timestamp defines the timestamp used for requeuing a Workload
	// that was evicted due to Pod readiness. Defaults to Eviction.
	// +optional
	Timestamp *RequeuingTimestamp `json:"timestamp,omitempty"`
	
	// backOffLimitCount defines the maximum number of requeuing retries.
	// When the number is reached, the workload is deactivated.	
	//
	// Defaults to null. 
	// +optional

> 	BackOffLimitCount *int32 `json:"backOffLimitCount,omitempty"`

Reviewer 2: Please describe the implicit behavior of the backoff. What is the base backoff, and what is the exponent?

Author: It makes sense.

    
	// backOffLimitTimeout defines the time for a workload that 
	// has once been admitted to reach the PodsReady=true condition. 
	// When the time is reached, the workload is deactivated.
	// 	
	// Defaults to null.
	// +optional
	BackOffLimitTimeout *int32 `json:"backOffLimitTimeout,omitempty"`
}

type RequeuingTimestamp string

const (
	// creationTimestamp timestamp (from Workload .metadata.creationTimestamp).
	CreationTimestamp RequeuingTimestamp = "Creation"
    
	// evictionTimestamp timestamp (from Workload .status.conditions).
	EvictionTimestamp RequeuingTimestamp = "Eviction"
)
```

#### Workload

Add a new field, "requeuedCount", to the Workload to allow recording the number of times a workload is requeued.

```go
type WorkloadStatus struct {
	...
	// requeuedCount records the number of times a workload has been requeued.
	// When a deactivated workload is reactivated, this count is reset to 0. 
	//
	// +optional

> 	RequeuedCount *int32 `json:"requeuedCount,omitempty"`

Reviewer 3: How about adding the last requeue / backoff timestamp and the backoff duration, so it's possible to know when the workload will be "retried", without recomputing the exponential backoff logic for an external observer?

Reviewer 2: +1
I wanted to keep the API as minimal as possible, but I agree that usability can be compromised without a `maxBackoff`

Author: SGTM
I will extend this API.

Reviewer 2: can you add it? We are almost closing the release.

Author: I should do ASAP...

Author: @alculquicondor Here are quick API design sharing: Please let me know if the API design wouldn't be expected.

```golang
type WorkloadStatus struct {
	...
	// requeueState records 
	// 
	// +optional
	RequeueState *RequeueState `json:"requeueState,omitempty"` 
}

type RequeueState struct {
	// count records the number of times a workload has been requeued.
	// When a deactivated workload is reactivated, this count is reset to 0. 
	//
	// +optional
	Count *int32 `json:"requeuedCount,omitempty"`

	// +optional
	LastBackoffTime metav1.Time `json:"lastRequeuedTime,omitempty"`
	
	// +optional
	BackoffDuration metav1.Duration `json:"backoffDuration,omitempty"`
}
```

I'm organizing the above API.

Reviewer 2: instead of `BackoffDuration` and `lastBackoffTime`, it might be better to have just `requeueAt metav1.Time` that indicates the time at which Kueue will consider this workload again for admission.

The time when the workload was evicted is already visible in the condition.

Author: > instead of BackoffDuration and lastBackoffTime, it might be better to have just requeueAt metav1.Time that indicates the time at which Kueue will consider this workload again for admission.
> 
> The time when the workload was evicted is already visible in the condition.

That makes sense. Even if we add only `requeueAt`, we can avoid recomputing the exponential backoff logic.
After we truly want to have `duration` based on user feedback, we can extend API.

Author: Done.

> 	RequeuedCount *int32 `json:"requeuedCount,omitempty"`

Reviewer 3: What are the invariants that make a workload in "backoff" state? Is it a combination of `PodsReadyTimeout` condition and `.status.requeuedCount > 0`?

Author: Yes, that's right. Those parameters aren't configurable.

Author: Ah, there is one more thing. We won't expose the parameters to initialize Backoff: https://pkg.go.dev/k8s.io/apimachinery/pkg/util/wait@v0.29.1#Backoff

#### Proposed Sorting

The `pkg/workload` package could be modified to include a conditional (`if evictionReason == kueue.WorkloadEvictedByPodsReadyTimeout`) 
that controls which timestamp to return based on the configured ordering strategy.
The same sorting logic would also be used when sorting the heads of queues.

Update the `apis/config/<version>` package to include `Creation` and `Eviction` constants.

### Exponential Backoff Mechanism

When the kueueConfig `backOffLimitCount` or `backOffLimitTimeout` is set and there are evicted workloads by waitForPodsReady,

> the queueManager returns evicted workloads that an exponential backoff duration finished and other workloads as a headWorkloads.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
the queueManager holds evicted workloads with an exponential backoff. During this time, other workloads will have a chance to be admitted.
```

Author: Done.

The queueManager calculates an exponential backoff duration by [the Step function](https://pkg.go.dev/k8s.io/apimachinery/pkg/util/wait@v0.29.1#Backoff.Step).

### Evaluation of BackOffLimits

#### backOffLimitCount

When a workload eviction is issued with `PodsReadyTimeout` condition, 
a workload `.status.requeuedCount` is incremented by 1 each time　in the workload controller.

After that, when a workload `.status.requeudCount` reaches the kueueConfig `.waitForPodsReady.requeueingStrategy.backOffLimitCount`,
a workload is deactivated by setting false to `.spec.active` instead of be suspended in the jobframework reconciler.

> #### backOffLimitTimeout

Reviewer 2: What is the use case here?

Why isn't the backoffLimitCount enough?

Author: > Why isn't the backoffLimitCount enough?

Because `backoffCount` is difficult to estimate how many hours jobs will actually be retrying. So, to improve the possibility for estimation, I added timeout separate from count.

If you think that we shouldn't have `backoffLimitTimeout` separate from `backoffLimitCount`, I'm ok with removing `backoffLimitTimeout`.

@alculquicondor WDYT?

Author: SGTM
We can start only support `backoffCount` for now.

Author: Done.
